Hello everybody and welcome back.
In this case you're going to have a look at the shader Ed.
Now this may look familiar.
If you have a look over at the materials tab this is exactly the same as what we've been playing with
before.
However this time round we're going to have far more control over what is actually going on.
As you can see there are all these dots on the side.
There aren't those here.
That's just a series of values.
So what does that mean.
Well let's go find out more Hello everybody and welcome.
So in this lecture we're going to play with the shader Ed..
Now the shader it is very similar to our materials properties that we've had before.
So let's go and explore that first and then we'll start setting up and playing with it as well.
Some of the switch over into object mode and select one of my objects that has a material applied to
it.
Now at the very top we've got a series of predefined layouts and one of them is shading.
If we click on that it will take us to a presets up shader setup.
And this is really really useful.
However I struggle with screen space when it comes to this and it doesn't have my little area down in
the bottom here to show you keystrokes all the time.
But we'll have a quick overview then we'll sort out this workspace and then we'll play with the nodes
themselves.
So in front of us here we've got some windows we've got our 3D Ed windows so we can see what's really
going on when we change our materials around.
We've got this image editor on the left hand side and a file explorer as well.
Now I want to alter this sets up so it's suitable for me but I don't want to have it overwrite what
we currently got at the top so I'm going to right click on the shading tab and duplicate it on a double
click at the top there and rename it full call it shading smaller for the moment because I'm going to
make a smaller workspace for me to handle and then I'm gonna go ahead down to one of the corners of
these windows and start making the area smaller.
I don't want the file explorer.
I don't want the movie editor at the moment and also these are really the wrong way around our particular
model that we're working on is very vertical.
So let's play with our workspace a little further I'm going to make the shader Ed disappear completely
and then drag in from the side.
And here we go.
Our lamp is a vertical object that's about right it fills up a good portion of my screen.
And this area here that's currently got the lamp in it's what we can do there is go up to the editor
type and switch it to the shader editor.
And here we go we're back there.
Now I want a bit more space I'm not going to play with the properties panel for the moment so I'll press
the Anki and make that disappear and zoom in a little more brilliant.
That's a much better workspace to work with.
And don't be afraid of doing this yourself.
Being able to make the workspace comfortable for you is very very important.
There is one final thing I need to do one of the things that I want to do here is make this area on
the side suitable for keystrokes.
So I'm just gonna come in.
Change the edit to type text editor and hide the header.
Okay perfect.
So that's how I need it set up for me of course you don't need a little text editor in the bottom but
that's the important thing being able to manipulate your environment to work for you.
Let's have a look at the materials properties as we have been playing with them you'll see here that
many things match one another at the top here we've got a little checkbox on Joy eye to it because if
for some reason use nodes doesn't have a tick in it you won't be able to actually see anything happen.
We are going to use nodes to control our material you'll notice the next thing along is slot 1 in our
material at the moment we only have one material defined so there is only one slot occupied and we have
lamp paint which is the name here if we go at the top here we can put lamp and paint together you can
see updates and if we updated over here of course updates back over there as well and we can see there
are two users and that we can see down here as well there are two users the lamp shade and the lamp
base of this material which is great it means if we change one of the properties of this material it
affects everything that that material is applied.
Now let's have a look at the nodes themselves.
So we have this big one here.
The principle would be SDF.
This is a node that's a shader No.
There are a few other shader nodes you may want to pick and it's not always cut and dry which one you
might want to use since the principal BSD f shader has come out it's been incredibly useful it's enabled
us to make physically accurate materials.
However sometimes that's not actually what we want.
So it's important to realize that you can use other nodes as well and in some cases noticed down at
the bottom here we've got a mission that means it's going to emit something.
So this is very useful for our light bulb as we'll see in the future lecture coming up.
This is not very controllable.
It's better to use an emission node so let's have a look at nodes themselves.
We can move these around at the moment they're both selected some in the press the A key twice to these
select and then we can place these where we want and later on it will become apparent as our materials
get more complex that organizing these and making sure they're laid out in a useful manner is very important.
Otherwise it's very much like coding you'll end up with a big spaghetti mess.
And often these things are joked about being spaghetti because you end up with lines like this one go
between these two green sockets absolutely everywhere sustaining organized is really really important.
Well let's zoom in here and have a look at what's going on.
So we've got an output here that's green and we've got an input that is also green we can drag that
out and notice that our material goes black.
And that's because nothing is controlling the surface properties of this material anymore.
If I plug that back in it'll go red again because that's what we've got this set up to do.
In general you will want to link together green sockets purple sockets together grey sockets and yellow
sockets.
That's not always the rule but it's a good one to start with.
Occasionally you will end up plugging grey sockets into yellow sockets or yellow sockets into grey sockets.
But in general the colors will match.
So let's go ahead and play with this a little and see why.
Why do we want to do this.
We've got a simple material anyway.
Well it's about control at the moment in order to change the base color we have to click into here and
start changing.
So if we wanted it green or blue we could do that.
However if we wanted a bit more control or wanted to apply a text to it later on.
So that something else is controlling the color.
We will have to add something further to the left in order to plug into this yellow socket.
And this yellow socket dictates a color it's three values red green and blue.
And if you've got an image or something like that with an alpha texture you would have to separate that
out separately.
So this has three values coming into it red green and blue the gray one underneath is literally just
the value between 0 and 1 is often the case.
So let's go ahead and plug something into the base color.
Let's go and add another node so we can go to the ad menu at the top or just like on the 3d ed. We can
go shift in a.
That will also work and we can add in what's called an RG G.B. node and we can see as we go down here
we've got lots of different options.
We've got different shader types like this green one here and in the challenge coming up I'm going to
tell you to explore that and see what you come up with.
We've got texture we've got color does that sound right.
Was close.
It's got something called mixology be in it where you would mix colors together.
So what do we need here.
Well aren't you being the type of impulse so we can go ahead and pull that in and it's an input because
look it takes nothing on the left hand side all of the sockets that are on the left hand side are inputs
all of the ones on the right hand side are outputs.
This one doesn't have anything on the left hand side.
So it's just outputting.
So it's a type of node that's a raw bits of information.
And if we grab by left clicking the yellow socket and plug it into the base color you'll notice that
now we've got a very quick and easy way of exploring colors for our lamp.
Now let's do a test here of plugging something else in.
Now say we wanted to keep the principal just there but try something else.
How can we do that.
Well if we click on this little dropdown it makes the principal be SDF much much smaller.
That's great.
Now let's go ahead and add in a different node types a shift in eight at I'm gonna go down to Shada
and this time I'm gonna add in just a few speed SDF there's a much more simple node as you can see here.
Now let's plug the color in here and the output to the surface outputs and then now it's diffused.
So it's got no reflection at all.
We can change the roughness here but that's not gonna make that much difference to something that's
already diffused.
Which means that as the light hits its it gets scattered so there's not going to be many or if any reflections
on the surface.
And then we rate the roughness 100 percent this is definitely not going to have any shiny reflections.
Now that's not the type of material that we are going for.
So perhaps if we delete that and add in a gloss CBS the F now latch sounds more like it.
Go ahead plug the yellow into the yellow the green into the surface outputs Hey look at that.
That's got a nice sheen to it.
It looks completely different from what we've been playing with so far.
And of course we can adjust the roughness here and change how it looks.
This gives us a completely different aesthetic.
It looks completely different if it reminds me on the inside here as I'm moving around much much like
some of the Christmas decorations I've got for some reason.
Anyway as you can see here there are lots of different options in order to create your material and
we're really at the tip of a very very big and powerful iceberg.
But we're not going to delve into too much detail right at this moment in time.
And it's time for your challenge.
Okay.
Your challenge is the play with the materials in the node Ed..
This is really to just get you familiar with what's going on there we're gonna be playing with it a
little more in the next lecture and adding a bit more interest to our lamp.
But otherwise it's just a playground for you and I what I'd like you to do is create at least two different
materials.
Now remember that you can take your material and still store it there so that it's still applied to
your model.
That's that's absolutely fine.
But what I'd like to do is just explore and create two different materials.
Try some of the other options there and see what you come up with.
Remember that some of these nodes are more complex than others.
So for instance if you picked the glass shader you'd end up creating a wonderful glass type object but
it will take a lot more rendering time then a simple diffuse shader.
So go ahead create two different materials and experiment with those different shader nodes as well.
Now remember you can have a material on the backdrop too and the little stage or the platform that we've
got that we're going to have the lamp jumped onto.
That's entirely up to you how you decide to layout your scene and assign those new materials to the
rest of your lamp.
If you haven't done that yet you may have just been following along and just have the material on the
base and haven't added any other metals yet.
This is a prime opportunity to do that supports the video and give that a go
Okay everybody Welcome back.
Let's go ahead now and add two different materials to our model using the note Ed Okay.
Everybody welcome back.
The materials I want to focus on here are not the lampshade.
I'm quite happy with what we had there before so I'm gonna revert my file back to where it was previously
which is very useful and I'm going to go and create my new shading workspace.
It's not gonna take me too long to do that.
There we go.
So we're back with the lamp paints here.
I am going to add in an RG be no.
There is this search function at the top.
I highly encourage you once you know the name of the thing you're looking for searching for it is gonna
be a lot quicker.
And of course later on you can start storing what you've made and that's going to make finding it much
much quicker.
Again you can actually store materials that you've made in a default blend file and that's incredibly
useful if they're materials that you find yourself making or using a lot of the time.
In fact a lot of the the material packs that you can buy online simply are someone who's done that they've
packaged everything together and premade them and just stored them in a file that you can apply any
points and you can do that yourself as well but I'm digressing.
I've got this set up again that read isn't quite right.
I think I'm gonna have to play with it.
There we go it's a bit more orange.
There we go.
So that's that's looking good there.
But the ones I really want to look at.
Are they the stem itself.
So the moment we've got this kind of set up here and I don't think the stem is perhaps dark enough or
whether I wanted this raw metal color I am going to hide my armature though it really is blocking the
rest of the model.
So let's have a look at some other options that we can do.
So I'm going to go ahead and inputs and RG B notes I can change things around when we get rid of the
principal B.S. the f the moment and just try some of the other options that we've got here.
So we'll go to shader there must be a shader at this point if you have played around with some of the
other options you will notice that they just don't work this output node or rather this input node will
only accept a shader output node.
It just won't work otherwise.
Let's go back to shader.
There are lots of things to pick from now and it's a true pick is something that looks really cool on
things that are metallic.
So I'm going to try that here especially things like saucepans I don't know what it's going to look
like at this point in time it might look really cool.
In fact it's already starting to look a bit brighter which is kind of why I wanted it to look like in
the first place and if I make it less rough so it's a bit more reflective.
It's starting to look actually really nice I'm liking how this is turning out.
And let's just try twisting this around slightly I don't think that's going to make too much difference
to how our current model is looking though.
So again playing with these figures and seeing what you end up creating with them obviously 100 percent
shining as there there's not going to work is more chrome.
So yes playing with all of these settings and just seeing what you come up with is a great way of exploring
such a powerful setup without really worrying about what you're doing.
I know that sounds a bit haphazard but seriously you can come up with something that you wouldn't have
done if you just being methodical about it.
This really is a playground for materials.
I'm liking how that's come out so I'm going to leave that's like that.
But before I do anything else we are looking at this and look Dev mode it's very important that we check
it occasionally in rendered mode as well to make sure that what we think it looks like is what it actually
looks like and our scene we've turned off the lamps that's out there so I'm going to turn on the the
lights that are in the scene itself and turn on the backdrop as well.
Now you can see it's actually a much darker material than it made it look in the first place but I'm
still quite happy with the shading and how it's looking here how it's playing with the reflections.
Now I can start changing these up and I do think I want a slightly higher roughness and then remember
you can press control and B draw a render border that will certainly speed things up and what you can
also do at that point is go to your render properties and come down to your sampling rates and on your
viewport turn that up much higher.
So if I set this to 64 I'm going to get a much higher quality render or even higher it does depend on
the strength of your computer.
So if I went to 256 and I tried that on my old laptop I'd be waiting a while but because I got this
small area we can see in detail what's going on and I'm really liking the effect that the answer tropic
shader here is giving us in rendered mode.
I'm going to come out of that now with control alt some vague and we see that this the actual rendering
itself is taking a significant amount of time longer it's going to knock the viewport back down to 32.
That's from my system.
You'll probably have different settings yourself.
Okay.
So that's one material done this backdrop I'm not liking it being super shiny it's great for showing
off reflections and things like that but I think it needs to be a bit of a lighter environment perhaps
different colour than grey as well so I'm going to bring the color up I'm going to lower the amount
of reflections by increasing the roughness against it's a bit more of a matte floor and the base colour.
Yeah I'm going to take that out as well.
Search for an Archie B note it's right at the top we can plug that in.
Now we might want this to look more orange to make it look a warm environment or because it's a lamp
we might want it's a a colder environment perhaps a blue a darker blue.
Now this points of course we might wants to expand our windows and just have a look at the scene overall.
Yeah I'm liking the new color that we've got fat.
So I'm liking the lampshade itself.
I'm liking the new material that we've applied to this part of our model the stand the arm the business
moving around.
I think that's really important because that's that needs to be distinct from the rest of the model.
It's a nice simple set up here.
And of course the background itself.
The only thing we've not got is the bit that we're jumping on now.
Do I have that there.
Yes I've called it a bench.
So you've got this object that we're jumping on and I think it should have its own material.
I don't think it does at the moment.
So I'm a bit cramped with my window so let's move this back again.
Yes Currently it's set to reflection in fact the floor is also reflection so let's call this back drop
and be explicit about that.
I think I missed naming something else earlier on but never mind I'm going to remove the material from
this model entirely and I'm going to click new notice we're not going into the material properties on
the left hand side anymore.
And once we've done that you know I haven't done I do apologize.
I haven't got a little area down here for my key strokes.
So hopefully if you have been relying on them it hasn't covered up too many.
There we go.
So now we're in this area we've got this object here.
I think I'm going to leave it as a light source of yellowy orange color something like that as it's
a focal point of the scene it's something we're going to try and get our lamp jumping on but I'm not
going to add anything else to it other than perhaps an argy B notes so we can control the color a bit
more explicitly and what we can do here is I want the exact color we currently have here.
I'm going to click on the preview box at the bottom which is going to bring up the same options as we
have here.
And once I've done that I can fit a little eyedropper icon and come over that existing color.
There we go and then plug it in.
So we starting off where we want to Cape really and how are you guys getting on how your scene's coming
along as well now that they are starting to get coloured in and have materials on them things to start
looking much much better.
Do remember that at this point if you're in Look Dev mode as I am at the moment let's make this full
screen then you're going to have something that looks a lot brighter than your then if you were in rendered
married so it's important to hop in and out of both and make sure what you think you're getting is what
you think you getting.
Yeah and make sure what you think you're going to get is actually what's happening in the background
and that's going to become especially important in a couple of lectures time because we're not going
to be able to properly preview what's going on here in terms of what the materials and the lighting
is going to be doing.
So we're gonna have to hop into cycles quite a bit to make sure that things are behaving themselves.
So that's it for this lecture please share how you're getting on so far.
I'd love to see what type of materials you've decided to settle on your model.
And remember you don't have to settle on them.
You can always go back later and tweak them to your heart's content.
Show your work over in the discussions and I'll see you all in the next lecture.